Today I'll show you the dangers of dealing with Excel.
As always let's copy the file from the original data folder into the prepared data folder.
The safest way to explore your file is to open it with notepad plus plus.
Let's do that.
First off this is not a good way to display CSV files.
We want one row of daughter per line.
If your file is being displayed like this then you need to toggle word wrapping.
Go to view and unchecked word wrap.
Much better isn't it.
You can see that there is lots of data in this file.
In fact over 50000 rows you can already see some data issues over here at the bottom but we'll deal
with them later.
Right now I would like to show you something else.
Scroll up to the top and scroll about halfway to the right.
Pay attention to two things.
Do you see that all the dates have slashes and are in American format from this record in row 3.
You can tell that the month comes first then the day and then the year.
Let's look at the first row again.
Here you can see that the date is 11th August 1991.
Let's remember that 11th of August.
The second thing I'd like you to notice is that the data set has credit card numbers by the way.
I want to reiterate that these are fake numbers but what you can see is that all 16 digits are displayed
in this data.
Now let's close the file open up Excel and drug UCSC into Excel.
Now without doing anything simply save your file and open it up again in Notepad plus plus
scroll to the right and look at your data.
Now you can notice the dates in row 1 and 2 are presented with dots instead of slashes.
But the funny thing is that the data in row 3 is still present with slashes.
Note that this might not be the same for you because this effect depends on your computer settings.
If that is the case then just follow along what's happening on my screen.
So what happened here.
Excel so Datto which it recognizes a date and it decided to convert it to a format that is convenient
for me to read.
How does excel know which format I prefer.
Well it simply looked at my computer's regional settings and saw that I am used to the day month year
format with DOS and not slushes So what it did is went and changed the data for me but it did it incorrectly
.
As you can see the data in the first row change from 11th August to 8th of November.
Excel thought the dates were in European format and mistook the month for the day in the day for the
month.
This observation is backed by the fact that the third row has remained unchanged.
The reason is that Excel does not recognize this record as a date.
It was looking for a day month year and since there is no month with number 27.
Excel decided that this is not a date and left the record as is.
In short Excel completely messed up your dates.
Now let's look at the credit card numbers.
Where are they.
They aren't here anymore.
Excel has replaced them with a scientific number format.
As you can see we haven't even started the process yet and have already caused ourselves additional
problems.
Plus while the date issue causes major headache it is still reversible.
On the other hand the credit card screw up is not.
You cannot retrieve the full 60 digits from this format.
Imagine the consequences for an organization which loses its customers credit card numbers especially
if this is the only copy of the file.
This illustrates the importance of never touching your original data files even just opening them in
Excel can mess them up.
Now let's close this file and delete it.
It's useless to us because the data has been jeopardized.
Next time I will show you a bullet proof method for daughter raggedly